Staking miner (#3357)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn/learn-staking-miner.md

---
id: learn-staking-miner
title: Staking Miner
sidebar_label: Staking Miner
description: Learn about Phragmén optimization on-chain via staking miners
keywords: [staking, npos, miner, phragmén]
slug: ../learn-staking-miner
---

:::caution

The staking-miner code is experimental and it is still in development phase. Use is at your own
discretion, as there is a risk of losing some funds.

:::

Staking miner is a passive validator functionality that runs when a new set of validators need to be
elected for NPoS. This is a computationally intense process, hence the mining. Staking miners
compete with each other to produce election solutions which consist of a validator set, stake
distribution across that set, and a score indicating how optimal the solution is. Staking miners run

> the sequential Phragmén algortihm to produce results, and the result is then sent as a transaction

Reviewer: No, they can support multiple algorithms https://github.com/paritytech/staking-miner/blob/4fedbc68c436366d3559ea0cfab247787271c051/src/main.rs#L63

to the relay chain via a normal signed extrinsic. The transaction requires a bond, and a transaction
fee. The best solution is rewarded which in the least covers the transaction fee, and the bond is
returned to the account. If the solution is not valid, the bond and the fee are lost.

Staking miner uses a pallet called `pallet_election_provider_multi_phase` and can only produce

> solutions during the signed phase of the pallet's life cycle. Once the signed phase is over and the

Reviewer: Should like to some documentation of the `SignedPhase` preferably.

unsigned phase starts, only the off-chain workers can provide election results.

## NPoS election optimization

A basic election solution is a simple distribution of stake across validators, but this can be
optimized for better distribution equaling a higher security score. The staking miner does not act
as a validator and focuses solely on the election result and optimization of the solution. It
connects to a specified chain and keeps listening to new signed phase of the election pallet in
order to submit solutions to the NPoS election. When the correct time comes, it computes its
solution and submits it to the chain. The default miner algorithm is sequential Phragmén with a
configurable number of balancing iterations that improve the score.

> Running the staking miner requires passing the seed of a funded account in order to pay the fees for

Reviewer: I don't like the logical flow here. The title is `optimization`, and the previous paragraph is talking about that. Now you are suddenly talking about account seeds.

Author: Moved the 2nd paragraph into the first section of the page

the transactions that will be sent. The same account's balance is used to reserve deposits as well.
The best solution in each round is rewarded. All correct solutions will get their bond back and the
ones that submit invalid solutions will lose their bond.

![NPoS election optimization](../assets/staking-miner/NPoS-election-optimization.png)

## Signed Phase of the election pallet

> The election provider pallet `pallet_election_provider_multi_phase` is divided into two phases,

Reviewer: Great to have this

**signed** and **unsigned**. At the end of the pallet's timeline, the function `elect()` is called.

```
                                                                   elect()
                +   <--T::SignedPhase-->  +  <--T::UnsignedPhase-->   +
  +-------------------------------------------------------------------+
   Phase::Off   +       Phase::Signed     +      Phase::Unsigned      +
```

Solutions provided by the staking miner can only be submitted during the signed phase. Solutions are
submitted and queued on the chain as a `RawSolution`. Once submitted, a solution cannot be retracted
by the originating account.

`RawSolution` struct definition:

```
pub struct RawSolution<S> {
    pub solution: S, // The solution itself
    pub score: ElectionScore, // The claimed score of the solution.
    pub round: u32, // The round at which this solution should be submitted.
}
```

> A maximum of `pallet::Config::MaxSignedSubmissions` will be stored on-chain and they will be sorted

Reviewer: You should mention how much this value is in Polkadot and Kusama, and link to it.

based on score. Higher the score the more optimal the election solution is.

Upon arrival of a new solution:

1. If the queue is not full, it is stored in the appropriate sorted index.
2. If the queue is full but the submitted solution is better than one of the queued ones, the worse
   solution is discarded, the bond of the outgoing solution is returned, and the new solution is
   stored in the correct index.
3. If the queue is full and the solution is not an improvement compared to any of the queued ones,
   it is instantly rejected and no bond is reserved.

Upon the end of the signed phase, no more solutions can be submitted and the solutions in the queue

> will be checked using `Pallet::feasibility_check` which ensures the score is indeed correct, and

Reviewer: again, would be good if you would link to all of these docs from EMP pallet. Although, one problem now within parity is that we don't have proper links to docs. I mean, we do, but they are not stable over time. Your best bet right now is to use https://paritytech.github.io/substrate/

---
id: learn-staking-miner
title: Staking Miner
sidebar_label: Staking Miner
description: Learn about Phragmén optimization on-chain via staking miners
keywords: [staking, npos, miner, phragmén]
slug: ../learn-staking-miner
---

:::caution

The staking-miner code is experimental and it is still in development phase. Use is at your own
discretion, as there is a risk of losing some funds.

:::

The staking miner is a passive validator functionality which runs when a new set of validators need
to be elected for NPoS. This is a computationally intense process, hence the mining. Staking miners
compete with each other to produce election solutions which consist of a validator set, stake
distribution across that set, and a score indicating how optimal the solution is. Staking miners run
the any given staking algortihms(as of now, sequential Phragmén or PhragMMS, this is subject to

> change if improved alrgorithms are introduced) to produce results, and the result is then sent as a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
change if improved algorithms are introduced) to produce results, and the result is then sent as a
```

by the originating account.

`RawSolution` struct definition:

```
pub struct RawSolution<S> {
    pub solution: S, // The solution itself
    pub score: ElectionScore, // The claimed score of the solution.
    pub round: u32, // The round at which this solution should be submitted.
}
```

A maximum of `pallet::Config::MaxSignedSubmissions` will be stored on-chain and they will be sorted
based on score. Higher the score the more optimal the election solution is. On both Polkadot and
Kusama the
['MaxSignedSubmissions'](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/blob/master/runtime/polkadot/src/lib.rs#L446)
is set to {{ signed_max_submission }} submissions. This variable can be modified if needed through
governance.

Upon arrival of a new solution:

1. If the queue is not full, it is stored in the appropriate sorted index.
2. If the queue is full but the submitted solution is better than one of the queued ones, the worse
   solution is discarded, the bond of the outgoing solution is returned, and the new solution is
   stored in the correct index.
3. If the queue is full and the solution is not an improvement compared to any of the queued ones,

>    it is instantly rejected and no bond is reserved.

Reviewer 2: //cc @kianenigma mention that a solution with the "same score" will lose funds?

Author: Thank you for the review @niklasad1 I've created a separate issue for this #3726 (cc: @kianenigma)

---
id: learn-staking-miner
title: Staking Miner
sidebar_label: Staking Miner
description: Learn about Phragmén optimization on-chain via staking miners
keywords: [staking, npos, miner, phragmén]
slug: ../learn-staking-miner
---

:::caution

> The staking-miner code is experimental and it is still in development phase. Use is at your own discression, some funds might be lost.

Reviewer 3: Typo - discretion. Also, leave an empty space above and below the content of a docusaurus admonition as we might run prettier on the doc https://docusaurus.io/docs/markdown-features/admonitions#usage-with-prettier

```suggestion

The staking-miner code is experimental and it is still in development phase. Use is at your own discretion, as there is a risk of losing some funds.

```

:::

> Staking miner is a passive validator functionality that runs when a new set of validators need to be elected for NPoS. This is a computationally intense process, hence the mining. Staking miners compete with each other to produce election solutions which consist of a validator set, stake distribution across that set, and a score indicating how optimal the solution is. Stakign miners run the sequential Phragmén algortihm to produce results, and the result is then sent as a transaction to the relay chain via a normal signed extrinsic. The transaction requires a bond, and a transaction fee. The best solution is rewarded

Reviewer 3: Typo fix 

```suggestion
Staking miner is a passive validator functionality that runs when a new set of validators need to be elected for NPoS. This is a computationally intense process, hence the mining. Staking miners compete with each other to produce election solutions which consist of a validator set, stake distribution across that set, and a score indicating how optimal the solution is. Staking miners run the sequential Phragmén algortihm to produce results, and the result is then sent as a transaction to the relay chain via a normal signed extrinsic. The transaction requires a bond, and a transaction fee. The best solution is rewarded
```

> Staking miner is a passive validator functionality that runs when a new set of validators need to be elected for NPoS. This is a computationally intense process, hence the mining. Staking miners compete with each other to produce election solutions which consist of a validator set, stake distribution across that set, and a score indicating how optimal the solution is. Stakign miners run the sequential Phragmén algortihm to produce results, and the result is then sent as a transaction to the relay chain via a normal signed extrinsic. The transaction requires a bond, and a transaction fee. The best solution is rewarded

Reviewer 3: "Staking miner is a passive validator functionality that runs" - this sentence might need rephrasing

> which in the least covers the transaction fee, and the bond is returned to the account. If the solution is not valid, the bond and fee are lost.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which in the least covers the transaction fee, and the bond is returned to the account. If the solution is not valid, the bond and the fee are lost.
```

> Staking miner uses the election pallet called `pallet_election_provider_multi_phase` and can only produce solutions during the signed phase of the pallets life cycle. Once the signed phase is over and the unsigned phase starts, only the off-chain workers can provide election results.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Staking miner uses a pallet called `pallet_election_provider_multi_phase` and can only produce solutions during the signed phase of the pallet's life cycle. Once the signed phase is over and the unsigned phase starts, only the off-chain workers can provide election results.
```

## NPoS election optimization

> A basic election solution is a simple distribution of stake across validators, but this can be optimized for better distribution equaling a higher security score. The staking miner does not act as a validator and focuses solely on the election result and optimization of the solution. It connects to a specified chain and keeps listening to new signed phase of the election pallet in order to submit solutions to the NPoS election. When the correct time comes, it computes its solution and submit it to the chain. The default miner algorithm is sequential Phragmén with a configurable number of balancing iterations that improve the score.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A basic election solution is a simple distribution of stake across validators, but this can be optimized for better distribution equaling a higher security score. The staking miner does not act as a validator and focuses solely on the election result and optimization of the solution. It connects to a specified chain and keeps listening to new signed phase of the election pallet in order to submit solutions to the NPoS election. When the correct time comes, it computes its solution and submits it to the chain. The default miner algorithm is sequential Phragmén with a configurable number of balancing iterations that improve the score.
```

> Running the staking miner requires passing the seed of a funded account in order to pay the fees for the transactions that will be sent. The same account's balance is used to reserve deposits as well. The best solution in each round is rewarded. All correct solutions will get their bond back. And some invalid solutions will lose their bond.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Running the staking miner requires passing the seed of a funded account in order to pay the fees for the transactions that will be sent. The same account's balance is used to reserve deposits as well. The best solution in each round is rewarded. All correct solutions will get their bond back and the ones that submit invalid solutions will lose their bond.
```

![NPoS election optimization](../assets/staking-miner/NPoS-election-optimization.png)

## Signed Phase of the election pallet

> The election provider pallet `pallet_election_provider_multi_phase` is divided into two phases, **signed** and **unsigned**. And in the end of the pallets timeline, the function`elect()` is called. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The election provider pallet `pallet_election_provider_multi_phase` is divided into two phases, **signed** and **unsigned**. At the end of the pallet's timeline, the function `elect()` is called. 
```

```
                                                                   elect()
                +   <--T::SignedPhase-->  +  <--T::UnsignedPhase-->   +
  +-------------------------------------------------------------------+
   Phase::Off   +       Phase::Signed     +      Phase::Unsigned      +
```

> Solutions provided by the staking miner can only be submitted during the signed phase. Solutions are submitted and queued on the chain as a `RawSolution`. Once submitted, a solution cannot be retracted by the orinating account.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Solutions provided by the staking miner can only be submitted during the signed phase. Solutions are submitted and queued on the chain as a `RawSolution`. Once submitted, a solution cannot be retracted by the originating account.
```

`RawSolution` struct definition:
```
pub struct RawSolution<S> {
    pub solution: S, // The solution itself
    pub score: ElectionScore, // The claimed score of the solution.
    pub round: u32, // The round at which this solution should be submitted.
}
```
A maximum of `pallet::Config::MaxSignedSubmissions` will be stored on-chain and they will be sorted based on score. Higher the score the more optimal the election solution is. 

Upon arrival of a new solution:

1. If the queue is not full, it is stored in the appropriate sorted index.
2. If the queue is full but the submitted solution is better than one of the queued ones, the worse solution is discarded, the bond of the outgoing solution is returned, and the new solution is stored in the correct index.

> 3. If the queue is full and the solution is not an improvement compared to any of the queued ones, it is instantly rejected and no additional bond is reserved.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. If the queue is full and the solution is not an improvement compared to any of the queued ones, it is instantly rejected and no bond is reserved.
```
